Add proposal for embedded exporters in OTel Collector (#69)
prometheus/proposals: proposals/0069_prometheus-exporters-otel-embedding.md

## Embeddable Prometheus Exporters in OpenTelemetry Collectors

* **Owners:**
  * [@ArthurSens](https://github.com/ArthurSens)

* **Implementation Status:** Not implemented

* **Related Issues and PRs:**
  * https://github.com/prometheus/exporter-toolkit/pull/357
  * https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter/pull/3459
  * https://github.com/ArthurSens/prometheus-opentelemetry-collector (proof of concept)

* **Other docs or links:**

> TL;DR: This proposal introduces a mechanism to embed Prometheus exporters as native OpenTelemetry Collector receivers, reducing duplication of effort between the two ecosystems and enabling the "single binary" promise for telemetry collection without forcing reimplementation of hundreds of existing Prometheus exporters.

## Why

> The OpenTelemetry Collector ecosystem faces a significant challenge: many components in collector-contrib are "drop-in" replacements for existing Prometheus exporters but often become unmaintained before reaching stability. This duplication of effort occurs because the promise of "one binary to collect all telemetry" is valuable to users, leading to reimplementation of functionality that already exists in mature Prometheus exporters.

Reviewer: > "one binary to collect all telemetry" is valuable to users

If you ask me, it's a pretty bad idea for the users, or in other words: it has a net-negative value to users.

But obviously, this discussion is out of scope for this design doc. I propose to not value the approaches here. Just state that this approach is the one taken in the OTel collector ecosystem, without valuing it either way.

This issue became particularly visible during OpenTelemetry's CNCF Graduation attempt, where feedback highlighted that users often feel frustrated when upgrading versions. In response, the Collector SIG decided to be stricter about accepting new components and more proactive in removing unmaintained or low-quality ones.

> Meanwhile, the Prometheus community has developed hundreds of exporters over many years, many of which are stable. Creating parallel implementations in the OpenTelemetry ecosystem wastes community resources and often results in "drive-by contributions" that are abandoned shortly after acceptance.

Reviewer: Somehow, this section should mention that Prometheus exporters are "metrics only" for obvious reasons. Therefore, this is only talking about metrics collectors. To collect other telemetry signals, other collectors are still required.

This could, BTW, be another reason to go down this path: If you need an OTel style collector anyway for the non-metrics signals, the embedding approach still allows you to plug in Prometheus exporters for metrics. (While currently, if you are not happy with the metrics from the OTel native metrics collector, you needed to run the Prometheus exporter in addition to the OTel collector just for the metrics.)

### Pitfalls of the current solution

1. **Duplication of Work**: Infrastructure monitoring receivers are reimplemented in OpenTelemetry when functionally equivalent Prometheus exporters already exist.

2. **Unmaintained Components**: Many OpenTelemetry receivers that replicate Prometheus exporter functionality become unmaintained in early development stages.

3. **Quality and Stability Issues**: The pressure to provide comprehensive coverage leads to accepting components that may not meet quality standards, contributing to collector-contrib's stability problems.

4. **Diverging Ecosystems**: Two communities are solving the same problems independently, fragmenting effort and expertise.

5. **Maintenance Burden**: Both ecosystems must independently maintain similar functionality for monitoring the same infrastructure components.

## Goals

* Enable embedding of Prometheus exporters as native OpenTelemetry Collector receivers via the OpenTelemetry Collector Builder (OCB).
* Reduce duplication of effort between Prometheus and OpenTelemetry communities.

> * Maintain the "single binary" promise for users who want comprehensive telemetry collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Maintain the "single binary" promise for users who follow the single binary approach.
```

Users who want comprehensive telemetry collection can also have it with multiple binaries. The need for a single binary really only arises from the wish for a single binary itself.

* Leverage existing, mature Prometheus exporters instead of reimplementing them in OTel Collector's side.
* Unify the two ecosystems to increase the likelihood of attracting more maintainers and contributors.

### Audience

* Prometheus exporter maintainers and developers
* OpenTelemetry Collector users and contributors
* Organizations using both Prometheus and OpenTelemetry in their observability stack
* Distribution builders (e.g., Grafana Alloy, OllyGarden Rose, AWS ADOT, DataDog DDOT, Elastic EDOT)

## Non-Goals

* Replace the existing OpenTelemetry Prometheus receiver (which scrapes Prometheus endpoints).
* Force all Prometheus exporters to implement embedding interfaces immediately.
* Automatically remove existing OpenTelemetry receivers that overlap with Prometheus exporters (this follows OpenTelemetry's own component removal policy).
* Mandate that OpenTelemetry collector-contrib includes embedded Prometheus exporters (distributions can be customized).

## How

### Overview

> Prometheus exporters function similarly to OpenTelemetry Collector receivers: they gather information from infrastructure and expose it as metrics. The key difference is the output format and collection mechanism. Prometheus exporters expose an HTTP endpoint (typically `/metrics`) that is scraped, while OpenTelemetry receivers push metrics into a pipeline.

Reviewer: And Prometheus exporters are only concerned with metrics, no other telemetry signals.

```yaml
receivers:
  node_exporter:
    scrape_interval: 30s
    exporter_config:
      # Node exporter specific configuration
      collectors:
        - cpu
        - diskstats
        - filesystem

exporters:
  otlp:
    endpoint: otelcol:4317

service:
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [node_exporter]
      exporters: [otlp]
```

### Implementation Steps

1. **Extend exporter-toolkit** with the new interfaces and OpenTelemetry Collector receiver implementation
2. **Implement the Prometheus to pmetric converter** (potentially adapting existing code)
3. **Update one reference exporter** (e.g., node_exporter) to implement the new interfaces as a proof of concept
4. **Validate** with OpenTelemetry Collector Builder
5. **Document** the integration pattern for other exporters
6. **Gradually adopt** across other Prometheus exporters based on community interest

### Migration and Compatibility

* **No breaking changes** to existing Prometheus exporters that don't adopt the interfaces
* **Opt-in adoption** - exporters can choose when/if to implement embedding support
* **Backward compatibility** - embedded exporters still work as standalone exporters

### Known Problems

> 1. **Dependency conflicts**: Prometheus exporters and OpenTelemetry collector-contrib use different dependency versions. Building a distribution with both may require dependency alignment or replace directives.

Reviewer: We need to be careful to not accidentally link in half of the OTel ecosystem into a normal exporter build. In principle, I assume that the exporter build should be mostly unaffected, but we know how things go if you do some innocuous import of some client library…

Author: It's inevitable to introduce otel dependencies while building the adapter, but I see three ways forward:

* A Prometheus exporter does not implement the interfaces and continues not to be embeddable
* A Prometheus exporter implements the interfaces in its main module and inherits the otel dependencies
* A Prometheus exporter creates a separate module that will be embeddable. The original module remains intact

2. **Scope of adoption**: It's unclear how many Prometheus exporters will adopt these interfaces. The proposal targets exporters in the `prometheus` and `prometheus-community` GitHub organizations initially.

> 3. **Metric semantics**: Subtle differences in how Prometheus and OpenTelemetry handle certain metric types may require careful mapping.

Reviewer: I see a source of friction in the different naming conventions.

The idea with naming schemas could complement this nicely and should maybe mentioned here.
